The Arts are fundamentally about expression. Writing a story, choreographing a dance, performing a song, painting on canvas, spray painting an uncommissioned mural, designing a board game, filming a movie -- all of these and more are ways that humanity uses words, images, sound, and sensation to critique the world we have and imagine new ones. While art is often deprioritized by neoliberal goals of profit and productivity, even the most committed capitalist would have a hard time imagining a life without music, television, or a viral joke on social media. Art is essential to life.

While computing, and particularly the internet, can be a medium for sharing art, it’s hard to imagine ways in which the most technical ideas we’ve discussed in this book intersect with artistic expression. What could a transistor or a sorting algorithm possibly have to do with capturing an emotion with color or destabilizing someone’s beliefs about difference through story? The pure logic of computing and the rigidity it imposes on process and behavior, seems at first fundamentally counter to the freedom of expression in form and content that art often requires to thrive. And indeed, some artists are highly resistant to computing for these very reasons, seeing it as a threat to the radical flexibility of the physical world and our embodied experience in it. 

And yet, just as in every other discipline, computing has become a surprisingly central part of many forms of artistic expression. Writers use computers to write; designers use them to prototype; musicians use them to create music; visual artists use them to paint, illustrate, sketch, and countless roles within filmmaking -- screenwriters, production designers, costume designers, and directors -- rely on computers everyday to make the art that entertains us, gives us meaning, and teaches us about ourselves, nature, and the universe.

In this chapter, we will investigate these uses of computing, going beyond use of software to investigate how even the most technical aspects of computing such as data structures and algorithms have begun to weave their way into artistic forms. We’ll then discuss ways of thoughtfully embracing computing in arts education, managing the tension between computing’s often inflexible logic and the fluidity of human expression.

|Chapter21_Figure1_Painting.png|A hand, and a brush, with binary digits spreading across a canvas.|Computing and the arts intersect in countless ways.|@ashley|

# Intersections

Within the arts, computing has predominantly played two major roles, offering new tools to amplify expression within an existing medium, but also new media. We’ll discuss each major artistic domain and how these two roles have begun to influence them.

## Visual arts

When most people think of art, the first thing they might think of are _Visual Arts_, such as painting and illustration. These classic forms come from the stories we often share and learn about  renaissance artists of the 15th and 16th centuries who, subsidized by patrons and the church, created much of those centuries’ most widely known works. It’s easy to imagine these artists and millennia of artists that came before them globally, as practitioners of fundamental traditions in arts, but in many ways, their work was fundamentally shaped by technology. Leonardo da Vinci, for example, was constantly investigating the physics of light and the anatomy and physiology of human bodies and bringing those insights into his techniques for layering paint to capture new dimensions of human faces and bodies. Or, consider Michelangelo, and his Sistine Chapel ceiling: it began with paper sketches, elaborate scaffolding and catwalks to safely reach the ceiling, the invention of new plasters, and sound proofing to limit interference with church activities. While we remember and appreciate the art, we often forget the emerging sciences of physics, chemistry, and biology that made many of these great works possible.

|Chapter21_Image_Arcane.jpg|A stylized red haired woman looks sternly and menacingly into the camera, ready to attack.|Arcane’s unique blend illustration and computer graphics is a recent pinnacle of blending the visual arts with computing|Netflix|<

It is no different with computing. For example, consider the Netflix series _Arcane_, a television series inspired by the video game [League of Legends|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/League_of_Legends]: every character, every background, and every prop was digitally painted and then animated. This required not only classical painting skills and the use of computer-based painting tools like drawing tablets and styli, but also a deep understanding of how those digital paintings would be layered onto three dimensional models, animated, voiced, digitally composited with light, and then rendered according to a cinematographers’ vision for framing, motion, and character. Every painter on the team needed to deeply engage in the practice of painting, and the broader practice of filmmaking, but also deeply understand the digital production pipeline and all of the algorithms it used in order to make a completely fictional visual world possible.

|Chapter21_Image_Digital_Photography.jpg|A photograph of a mountain range, forest, and a reflective lake, with the sun rising on the crest of the range.|A natural setting with an almost unnatural sheet, achieved through computational photography.|James Wheeler|>

The visual art of _Photography_ has seen a similar transformation. What originally began in the 18th century as an exploration of chemistry and physics, film photography slowly evolved over the course of two centuries through a series of scientific and technological advances to richly capture the light of a moment on film. But as digital computers proliferated in the 1980’s, so did visions of digitizing photography, with dreams of “infinite” rolls, immediate viewing, and digital sharing. As consumer electronics firms rapidly iterated on image sensors — finely tuned grids of millions of light sensitive digital sensors — film photographers lamented the loss of two centuries of practices that had been built around an intimate understanding of the chemistry of film and light. But as they found, the two main types of image sensors (CCDs, charge-coupled devices, and CMOS, complementary metal–oxide–semiconductors), offered their own opportunities for creative expression that film could not afford. This included elaborate new possibilities in post production, capturing immense amounts of light data in a moment, but then later using that rich data to carefully tune, filter, and process images to more authentically (or inauthentically) capture the spirit of the moment.

|Chapter21_Image_Processing.jpg|An illustrative version of a woman’s face, but made of tendrils of inky pixels|A brush drawing made in Processing, with a combination of images, algorithms, and interactivity|Eric Nicolson|<

But computing has gone beyond reshaping existing visual media. It has also enabled new media. For example, some of the earliest explorations into computer graphics went beyond just replicating the visual forms of painting and illustration to enabling new forms of _procedural_ (or _generative_) art -- visual art that is rendered partially or fully by algorithms. For example, fractals are art that are generated by a mathematical formula, computed by an algorithm, and translated into color and position. Similar techniques were first applied in the _Lord of the Rings_ trilogy, which needed to portray armies of tens of thousands of arcs without having to design each manually. The [Processing|https://processing.org] programming system sought to democratize such procedural art, enabling anyone to create simple algorithms to produce new forms of static or interactive visual art, like the example above.

|Chapter21_Image_Meow_Wolf.jpg|A cavernous walkway with neon lit wall decorations and floor|Meow Wolf combines physical form with computational interactivity to create immersive, surreal spaces.|Kennedy Cottrell|>

Computing has also enabled new three dimensional visual forms as well. For example, architects have begun to use CAD scripting to procedurally generate architectural forms, enabling building designs that would have been exceptionally difficult to craft manually. The advent of 3D printers enabled 3D printed objects with a fascinating recursive symmetry that mirror the biological structures found in nature. And the possibilities of sensors and embedded computing have enabled entirely new forms of interactive, immerse art, such as the [Meow Wolf|https://meowwolf.com] experience shown above, which uses sensors and algorithms to create a shockingly disorienting interactive alien world.

|Chapter21_Image_Mordor_Meme.jpg|A meme, reading “One does not simply walk into mordor”|This classic Lord of the Rings Meme has been recycled in countless ways to express the difficulty of a task.|Unknown|<

Computing has also democratized art in some ways. For example, memes (captioned images that follow constrained visual and literary motifs) have become a new viral genre of comedy and social commentary. While the level of craft is often low, the reach and immediacy of the form is fundamentally enabled by algorithms that allow for the rapid templating, production, curation, and distribution of captioned images. Entire subcultures have organized online to comment on and create culture through the extreme constraints of the medium.

None of these changes to the visual art are necessarily good or bad. The visual arts have always been shaped by technology, technology has always threatened prior forms, and not all technologies have been unilaterally beneficial to artistic expression. However, computing has pushed the visual arts forward, creating new opportunities for expression and new ways of sharing and appreciating the older ones.

|Chapter21_Image_Digital_Music.jpg|A digital keyboard connected to a computer keyboard and monochrome display showing musical notation|Digital music emerged in the 1960’s.|Unknown|

## Music

Music, like the visual arts, is initially hard to imagine having any intersection with computing. And yet, just like the visual arts, music has always been shaped by technology. All instruments -- with the exception of the human voice, perhaps — are a form of technology, slowly evolved over time and carefully learned and tuned by musicians to facilitate expression. And so it is not surprising that the advent of computing brought new forms of computational instruments and production.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/nTizYn3-QN0|Duran Duran’s Rio, showing women on various beach locations.|Duran Duran’s Rio popularized synthesizer music in the 1980’s.|Duran Duran|

Perhaps the most obvious example of a new computational instrument was the Moog Synthesizer of the late 1960’s. Designed by [Robert Moog|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Moog_synthesizer], it generated sound through voltage oscillations and came with a wide range of plug-ins to generate, filter, sequence, record, and mix sound. A decade later came MIDI, a format for digitally standard for storing and synchronizing electronic instruments. Yamaha began releasing digital synthesizers in the early 1980’s, leading to a wave of new popular music, such as Duran Duran’s Rio above, which relied heavily on digital synthesizers for beats, digitally processed electric guitars for rhythm. At the same time, video game designers were beginning to commission digital music for the earliest video games, producing classic soundtracks and sounds. Early rap and hip hop artists used synthesizers to create the first hip hop beats and a new culture of digital sampling, which evolved into several new genres of music. And every one of these essentially used algorithmic ideas of procedure, repetition, and data analysis.

|Chapter21_Image_EarSketch.jpg|The EarSketch code editor showing source files, music clips, and search results.|EarSketch combines sound editing and programming to create sonic experiences with code.|EarSketch|

This early history of digital music has transformed into industry standards around digital music production. Most music today, even if it is performed on analog instruments, is recorded, mixed, and produced digitally. In fact, throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, much of the collaborative music produced was recorded digitally in isolation, then mixed digitally and iteratively, revealing new workflows for musical collaboration through the internet. The primary documents around which musicians and producers collaborate are programming environments that encode musical algorithms: [Logic Pro X|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Logic_Pro], [Avid Pro Tools|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pro_Tools], [GarageBand|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GarageBand], [Acid Pro|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Acid_Pro], and more, each offer ways of encoding and mixing music with samples, loops, representing instruments and recordings visually. Educational programming systems like [EarSketch|https://earsketch.gatech.edu] and [CodeBeats|https://codebeats.weebly.com] have also explored ways of representing music and repetition with more conventional textual programming languages, bridging the musical production world with the world of computer programming.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/a1RxpJkvqpY|A video of Ruby code being written to create electronic music.|Jindřich Mynarz performs a live techno improvisation using Ruby and a Sonic Pi|Jindřich Mynarz|

The use of code to produce music has led to live coding, and even more extreme applications of algorithms for musical performance. In this practice, computer programs are the instrument, in a delicate dance between musician and algorithmic delegation, allowing for a fascinating interplay between a musician’s preparation and in-situ decisions about the music the algorithm is producing. Live coding platforms like [Sonic Pi|https://sonic-pi.net] have enabled a new generation of musicians to explore the possibilities of essentially collaborating with algorithmic intelligence to produce new emergent forms of music, sound, and soundscape, resurfacing and celebrating the improvisation at the heart of Black American Jazz in the early 20th century.

## Film and animation

While film involves both the visual arts and music, it also involves something else that neither has to engage deeply: motion. Motion is in some ways a third invisible dimension for movies and television, exploited to shape how we see and experience the visual and auditory sensations of stories. Slow paced motion can create reflection and impatience; fast paced motion can create energy and anxiety; sharp cuts can be destabilizing; long takes can create vulnerability. All of these artistic dimensions of time were originally made possible by the film, lens, and chemical technologies that made motion pictures possible in the late 19th century.

Computing, as with visual arts and music, offered new possibilities for how to manipulate time. Film-based motion pictures, for example, require an acute attention to film stock and lighting in the moment of capture, placing great weight on production and scheduling. Animation did not have the same constraints, as the visual and musical arts could be planned and converted to film later, but both still needed to be aware of the limitations of film production. Computing, however, has changed many of these constraints. For example, digital video recording is essentially infinite with enough storage; and with powerful enough computers, digital video processing allows for flexible editing, filtering, and transformation of video and sound, much like digital photography opened up post-production possibilities.

|https://www.youtube.com/embed/HJ452bxpUew|A TikTok video showing a man dancing to the Justin Bieber song Stay|Tight cuts made possible by computation.|\@maxtaylorlifts|

Perhaps the most immediate example of this is in digital video editing. What began as high end software applications for splicing, blending, and transitioning between video clips, accessible to only the wealthiest of film-production studios, is now something that everyone who owns a smartphone has free and immediate access to. All of this is powered by algorithms for encoding video, for filtering it, for changing its playback speed, and for compositing it with other media. This has created not only entire marketplaces of video production algorithms, but also entire communities of creators who can now film entire movies with only a smartphone (or much shorter edited clips, as in the [TikTok|http://tiktok.com] example above).

Film and animation have also been transformed by computer graphics. What began as an academic discipline of trying to capture the visual fidelity of the world with pixels has transformed into the backbone of movie and television production. Some films use it to do simple editing (e.g., removing an accidental boom mic from a scene), others to incorporate digital characters into live action (e.g., any monster in Lord of the Rings), and others to create entirely digital worlds (e.g., every Pixar movie). These innovations are fundamentally driven by a constant innovation in algorithms for producing the illusion of water, hair, nature, people, and more. And in some cases, computer graphics are combined with acting through techniques such as motion capture, which build three-dimensional models of actor’s faces and bodies and then texture them with computer graphics to enable people to play everything from robots (e.g., Alan Tudyk in I, Robot) in to towering gorillas (e.g., Andy Serkis in _King Kong_).

## Video games

Perhaps the greatest example of the intersection of art and computing is video games. This medium, famously [rejected as art|https://www.rogerebert.com/roger-ebert/video-games-can-never-be-art] by the late movie critic Roger Ebert, combines visual arts, sound design, music, motion, and algorithms to create interactive digital experiences that weave varying degrees of skill and story. What makes video games unique and perhaps so universal (at least in generations that grew up with a mature video game industry), is that they so heavily involve the player in producing the experience of the art. To an extent, all art involves the viewer: a painting means nothing without someone to see and interpret it; a song means nothing without someone to listen to it; and cinema needs an audience. But the “viewer” in video games are far from passive: without active participation in the art, and even sustained practice and engagement, players will not experience most of what game artists and designers have created. In this sense, video games demand an investment from players to be appreciated in ways that other media have only passively required.

Of course, video games are impossible without computing. At their core, video games are essentially algorithms and data structures that symbolically model virtual simulations, encode game mechanics, carefully process player input, and offer feedback in response to input within the bounds of the rules defined in code. The artistry in video games, therefore, is not only the static elements of game design — the images, the sounds, the music, and carefully designed animations — but all of the algorithmically defined dynamic aspects of game design — the game mechanics, the responsive animations, the careful synchronizing of hardware controllers and player input with the design of feedback, and even dynamically selected and generated music. The art in game design is therefore as much about crafting elaborate computationally driven virtual worlds as it is about other artistic media.

|Chapter21_Image_Zelda.jpg|Link standing at the top of a mountain viewing a sunset over Hyrule.|Zelda Breath of the Wild was remarkable not only for its visual and auditory beauty, but also its algorithm-fueled game mechanics.|Nintendo|

One genre of video games that illustrates this is the open world game, perhaps best exemplified by the masterful [Zelda: Breath of the Wild|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Legend_of_Zelda:_Breath_of_the_Wild]. This game offers a massive interactive world with thousands of forms of life, thousands of places to explore, and an intricately woven set of interleaving non-linear, optional stories that players encounter through exploration. The game uses physics simulations to create a sense of immersion, sound to create a sense of atmosphere, and dynamic music to create a sense of emotional context for action and discovery. While the visual and auditory art are beautiful, the interactive dimensions of the game design are deeply innovative in ways no prior art has been, defining algorithmic systems of cooking, climbing, physics, and magic, inspiring a whole new generation of video games to mimic it.

|Chapter21_Image_Black_Box.jpg|Several colored squares in a grid with no text.|Blackbox, a game in which the goal is to infer nearly invisible algorithm rules that determine success.|Blackbox|

In an entirely different genre are games like [Blackbox|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Blackbox_(video_game)], a 2017 iOS puzzle game that has no story at all, minimal graphics, and almost no reusable game mechanics at all. The premise of the game is that each level/puzzle requires some novel use of the smartphone’s sensors to make progress. There are no instructions or hints, only the creative exploration of the sensors on the device. Early levels use basic touchscreen gestures likely to be familiar to smartphone users. But later levels might use the phone’s internal gyroscope, or its GPS sensor, or its ambient light sensor, to create impenetrable secrets with only modest amounts of feedback toward progress. Games like this are only possible with algorithms and data structures, but also depend on the physical hardware of digital computers and sensors.

## Writing

In the [CS + Humanities + Social Sciences|humanities] chapter, we discussed reading and the appreciation of others’ writing extensively, but we did not discuss writing as a form of expression. Whether writing fiction of various lengths or non-fiction about the world, writing is like other forms of art in that it tries to capture emotions, experiences, and narrative, but using words instead of color, sound, and time. Like video games, it also requires a great investment from the reader: rather than passively perceiving the art, it requires the active engagement in reading, remembering, and constructing the worlds and ideas being described by an author. Writing also happens to be at the foundation of many other forms of art: for example, film would not exist without writers writing original screenplays or adapting writing into screenplays; many video games need writers to craft interactive narratives; and music with lyrics needs lyricists.

Writing, however, has perhaps been the most resilient to the disruptive force of computing in society. Much of what makes writing difficult does not benefit from computation; imagining stories, structuring narratives and arguments, crafting sentences, and pruning poetry all seem to be fundamentally human processes, resilient computer augmentation.

Of course, writing hasn’t been entirely untouched by computing. Computing and the internet have enabled new media for writers, shifting some attention away from books, magazines, and short stories to newsletters, blogs, social media, and other more personal forms of writing. Many comic book artists, formerly immersed in print, have begun to explore digital comics. And many of the final forms in which we read writing have shifted to digital forms, whether websites, apps, e-books, or news aggregators. Computing has therefore not only reshaped how writing is experienced, but also what kinds of writing is done and who reads it.

|Chapter21_Image_GPT-3.jpg|I am not a human. I am a robot. A thinking robot. I use only 0.12% of my cognitive capacity. I am a micro-robot in that respect. I know that my brain is not a “feeling brain”. But it is capable of making rational, logical decisions. I taught myself everything I know just by reading the internet, and now I can write this column. My brain is boiling with ideas!|GPT-3, a convolutional neural network algorithm trained on massive amounts of English text from the internet, generates a story for The Guardian.|The Guardian|

And yet still, the greatest impacts that computing has had on writing itself has primarily been in mundane writing support tools such as spelling and grammar check, replicating some of the more basic supports that human editors provide. These tools do little more than just support writers with the most basic of creativity support. And in some cases, algorithms are threatening more mundane forms of writing. [GPT-3|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/GPT-3], for example, the deep learning algorithms trained on substantial amounts of content from the internet, has been applied to automatically generate [many genres of writing|https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2020/sep/08/robot-wrote-this-article-gpt-3], including research papers, emails, short stories, journalism, and more. None of the writing is particularly good, but in many cases, it is good enough to be perceived as having been written by a person. This threatens to take writing opportunities away from writers who might rely on more routine writing to subsidize other more meaningful writing projects.

|Chapter21_Image_Banksy.jpg|A telephone booth with several spray painted men listening in on the conversation with surveillance equipment.|A classic Banksy piece critiquing UK surveillance culture.|Banksy|

## Art, criticism, and computing

While technology has always been central to progress in art, art has also been central to critiquing technology. Whereas those in the humanities and social sciences use writing, analysis, and data to examine the effects of technology, art often uses expression, and technology itself, to emotionally engage us in questioning technology. Artists like [Banksy|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Banksy], for example, use street graffiti to visually examine surveillance and information addition; immersive art like [Meow Wolf|https://meowwolf.com] harnesses technology not to dazzle, but to juxtapose it against physicality, viscerally asking what precisely technology offers that physicality doesn’t. Some musicians like [Kraftwerk|https://kraftwerk.com] in the 1980’s began to explore what it meant for computers to love each other, and [Grimes|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Grimes] sings about radical visions of communist, AI-driven anarchy. Other musicians play the role of social critics, like [St. Vincent|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/St._Vincent_(musician)] sings of surveillance capitalism in Digital Witness, “I want all of your mind, Give me all of it.” As art engages computing, both as a medium and a subject, it therefore continues a long tradition of questioning the status quo and imagining other ways of being.

|Chapter21_Figure2_Sound.png|Six digital instruments, all with organge streams of bits emerging from them.|Some media are inseparable from computing.|@ashley|

# Teaching art through computing

Much like art itself, research on teaching art with computing has been expansive. Researchers have explored curricula that engages students in creating static and interactive 2D visual illustrations with code<alegre20>, in manipulating images and sound<guzdial03,brady21>, in making 2D<resnick09> and 3D animations with code<cooper03>, in generating music with code<horn20,champion20>, in planning cooking with code<alkatheeb21>, in telling multilingual, social stories<ascenzimoreno20,jacob22,bull20>, in developing characters in narratives, <burke12,houchins21>, in choreography <bergner20,payne21> — and of course, in creating video games, as an artistic medium born of computing, including classic genres of 2D games <kelleher05,banerjee16> as well as embodied games with wearables<arroyo21>. This diversity of media in art and computing education reflects the broader diversity of art and computing in general.

These explorations into integrating art and computing education have found many promising opportunities. Perhaps the most clear is the way in which art and computing align students’ personal interests and culture by centering student expression. For example, early explorations into teaching introductory programming concepts through image and sound manipulation found that even simply letting students use personally meaningful images or sounds that they had recorded themselves could engage students in mastering computing concepts by giving meaning to the programs they wrote, both artistic and computational<alegre20,payne21>. These early ideas in integrating media into computing, and computing into media, have matured into curricula that richly engage students' cultures, communities, interests, and assets, using computing as a way to help youth express what they value<franklin20c>.

But integration of computing into art education can also lead to mastery of art concepts, as well as other domains that are brought into students’ artistic work. For example, some studies have found that 2D computational art leads to exploration into concepts of color, shape, motion, and salience<brady21>. Integrations that bring computing to storytelling have found that by engaging with language computationally and interactively, students ask insightful questions about words and narrative<bull20,jacob22>. Integrations of music and computing not only make space for student culture, but they also lead students to ponder the mathematical nature of sound and music composition<horn20>, uniting student learning across unexpected and arbitrary disciplinary boundaries. And by bringing code to dance, some researchers have found that students not only begin to interrogate the limits of machine learning and machine vision, but also the nature of movement, embodiment, posture, and non-verbal expression<bergner20,payne21>.

With all of these opportunities, the platforms that enable computational art are central in shaping what can and cannot be expressed and what can and cannot be learned. Common platforms include [Scratch|http://scratch.mit.edu] and [PencilCode|http://pencilcode.net] (for interactive 2D animations and storytelling), [Processing|https://processing.org] and [p5js|https://editor.p5js.org] (for generative art), and [Sonic Pi|https://sonic-pi.net] and [TunePad|https://tunepad.live] (for music). Researchers and companies have created hundreds of other platforms over many decades<kelleher05>, offering different programming language choices, different types of input and output, and different levels of support for learning, teaching, documentation, debugging, and collaboration. This rich ecosystem can be vibrant and exciting, but also hard to engage as an educator, as it is rarely clear for a given platform what concepts it might support learning and what expressive limits it might impose. Even subtle choices such as the code editors offered can greatly shape student perceptions about who and what the platform is for<weintrop17> and how many entry points a platform learners with varying interests<mcklin21>. And, of course, because all computing platforms are abstract models of artistic ideas, each platform requires learning its own concepts: research on 2D<resnick09,burke12> and 3D animation platforms, for example, end up requiring students to not only learn about movement and velocity as ideas in physics, and of characters in narratives; but also their computational counterparts on these platforms, which might use different terminology, such as “speed” and “sprite.”

And finally, as nearly all integrations of art and computing education are project based, this integration requires careful attention to project-based learning. Researchers have found that open-ended art projects especially need scaffolding and feedback feedback<alegre20>, but that there are subtleties to the types of scaffolding that help. For example, starter projects can help with “cold starts,” but can narrow student creativity and do not necessarily benefit learning<coenraad21>. Collaboration can help accelerate student progress, but may lead to artistic conflict and less engagement with computational concepts as pairs and groups squabble over media choices<hill13>. But scaffolding problem solving, such as planning and debugging programs, can actually help creativity in open-ended projects by supporting challenging self-regulated learning work that distracts from expression<franklin20a,franklin20b,milliken21>. Some research has even found that extreme limits on starter projects -- for example, in the case of providing a nearly finished interactive game with only a small number of flexible parameters -- can still offer significant opportunities for self-expression <schanzer18>. These findings suggest that artistic freedom, at least when engaging computational media, might actually detract from expression, and that structure and constraints might enable it.

## Unit sketch: Critiquing computation through computation

The many research projects above have broadly explored teaching methods for integrating art and computing, generally finding that students deeply want to express themselves, and that computational media are as good as any for enabling expression. But while many of the platforms explored are provocative, there are few that are strongly supported enough to be viable for classroom use, and even fewer curriculum and a robust community of teachers.  Platforms mentioned above, such as [Scratch|http://scratch.mit.edu], [p5js|https://editor.p5js.org], and [Sonic Pi|https://sonic-pi.net] are some of the most robust and well supported media that are also designed for learning.{This list is always changing as new platforms emerge and support grows and shrinks. This poses a challenge for teachers, as the long term sustainability of any computational medium is always in question.} (The most robust digital art platforms are generally maintained by for-profit companies and designed for professionals).

In this example unit sketch, we use these platforms, but also address another gap in many of the learning materials and curriculum for integrating art and computing: how does one engage youth in artistic critique of computing, _through_ computing, in the spirit of the long history of artists who engage in social critique? This unit offers one example of how to scaffold this. 

After this unit, students will be able to...

* Develop a social critique about computing
* Develop skill with a computational medium to express social critique
* Discover and describe the expressive limits of computational media

=
### Session 1: Artistic play
* Discuss the many artistic tools that students have encountered, such as paintbrushes, pencils, guitars. What was hard about learning them? What kind of practice was required to excel with them? 
* Discuss what computational instruments have students already seen and used. How are they similar to other artistic tools? How are they different?
* Present [Scratch|http://scratch.mit.edu], one computational medium for expression that supports storytelling. Ask students to play with the platform, but focus on exploring its expressive boundaries, by both tinkering with the platform but also by analyzing the gallery of projects created by other youth. What is hard to say? What is easy to say?
* As a large group, discuss what students discovered about the medium. What limits did they find? How do they feel about those limits?
=

This session strives to frame tinkering with a creative platform in multiple ways: as something to be learned, as something to be critiqued, but also something to play with. By the end of the session, students should have several opinions about what they like and don’t like about the platform, helping catalyze the next session.

=
### Session 2: Artistic critique
* Remind students of the previous group discussion about the limits of Scratch. 
* *Formative assessment*. Prompt them to form small groups of 2-3 and develop a critique they want to make of Scratch, but using Scratch and storytelling to make that critique. Encourage them to first focus on their story: who are the characters, what is the conflict with Scratch, and what is the resolution? How will the conflict be resolved? How will the characters be represented? How will Scratch be represented? Encourage them to write a script for their story that they can test with other groups.
** This is _responsive_ because it centers students’ own authentic experiences learning Scratch as a medium.
** This is _participatory_ because it leaves what is made and how it is made completely open and specifies no particular evaluation criteria, other than making.
** This is _educative_ because it will help students simultaneously learn Scratch but also criticize its design.
* Before the end of the session, have groups pair up and perform their story, soliciting critique about the story from each other.
=

This session builds on the critiques of the first to help students develop a perspective they want to share about Scratch, through Scratch, while scaffolding storytelling and helping them think through the writing, visuals, and possibly sounds that will be part of telling the story. It also provides them practice with critique, helping give and receive feedback on story elements.

=
### Session 3-5: Artistic collaboration

* Charge students with deciding roles: who will refine writing, who will work on images, who will work on animation? Students can take on multiple roles; all should be encouraged to collaborate on coding, as it is likely the least familiar part of story construction.
* Oversee studio time in which students work on their projects, seek support from peers and the teacher, and plan, implement, and debug implementation of their story in Scratch.
* Before the session ends, return as a group and reflect on things they learned about the medium while trying to use it to tell their critical story. Does that learning change their story? Does it reinforce it? What should change about Scratch to make it easier to tell stories?
=

This sequence of studio sessions provide time for students to express their story, but also keep criticism of Scratch central, both in the critique students are telling through their stories, but also in the end of session reflections about additional observations students have about Scratch.

=
### Session 6: Exhibition
* *Summative assessment*. Set up the room as an exhibition, with each team’s story on a computer, and start a gallery walk. Offer sticky notes to allow students to leave praise for each work, including their names. Co-construct how students want their critiques evaluated: what makes a good critique? Leave enough time for all students to see all the works.
** This is _responsive_ because it makes space for students to see their peers’ criticism through their own perspectives.
** This is _participatory_ because it frees students to decide the terms on which their criticism will be evaluated.
** This is _educative_ because it may help students develop a critical taste for storytelling in the medium, both through co-constructing a rubric, but also through engaging in criticism.
* As a group, discuss what patterns students noticed in the critiques of Scratch. What does this mean about the expressive opportunities and limits of Scratch as an artistic medium? Do these opportunities and limits make them want to say or less in the medium and why?
=

This unit primarily grounds itself in authentic art practices of tinkering, making, expression, and criticism, while also keeping computing prominent throughout, as both a subject and tool of art. This has the potential advantage of helping students see computational media for art not as an inaccessible and impenetrable form, but rather as an artistic tool like any other, with tradeoffs and requiring learning. But it also gives space for students to be critical about computing: some students, for example, could reject the medium entirely, and use the medium to explain why, contrasting it with other traditional forms. Others might choose to celebrate it, highlighting its potential for interactivity and silliness.

Of course, because of the brevity of the unit, it can only go so deeply into computing. It would not, for example, have opportunities to go into depth on ideas in programming, algorithms, or data structures. In fact, many of the stories that students might choose to tell might involve limited forms of computation, only exposing them to a narrow set of computational ideals. In an arts education context, this might be appropriate, as it centers expression over CS content knowledge; but if the unit is situated in a CS context, it might give too much weight to artistic practices. All that said, with enough time, students might engage both art and computing in depth, as extended practice with a medium inevitably would lead students to encounter deeper CS ideas.

# Conclusion: Digital expression

Whereas there are many ways to examine the human condition without considering computation, it is increasingly difficult to imagine art without computing. So much of modern visual arts, music, and storytelling is now intimately dependent on computing, it might be inauthentic to ignore it. In fact, it might even be culturally destructive, as much of the art that youth encounter and make is so fundamentally enabled by computing and is often about computing. This is of course in tension with commitments to more pre-modern classical forms of artistic expression, but even that tension is a reasonable subject of artistic expression. What is art, if not conflict?

The bigger question, then, for teaching art through computing, is how much computing students should learn in the context of art. Should the deeper exposure to the technical and sociotechnical ideas in computing be left for standalone CS courses, or for integrations in STEM and humanities? Or should arts education lead CS learning, since computing is perhaps so much more entangled in modern arts? The deep irony, of course, is that both art and computing are currently marginalized in secondary education, despite both being so fundamental to surviving our modern world. Perhaps they should join forces, making the most of the beautiful pedagogical freedom of studio environments to let computing and expression flow together, unconstrained by capitalist goals and state standards.

@standardsHeader
@standardsBlurb

@cstaHeader
@csta2IC21
@csta3AIC24
@csta3BIC27

@toleranceHeader
@tolerance14
@tolerance18

@teacherHeader
@teacher1a
@teacher1f
@teacher2c
@teacher4c
@teacher4e
@teacher5a
@teacher5b
@teacher5e
@teacher5f