"
An app will not save us. We will not sort out social inequality lying in bed staring at smartphones. It will not stem from simply sending emails to people in power, one person at a time.
" Safia Noble, _Algorithms of Oppression_<noble18>

Being critical about computing isn't particularly fun or empowering. It's far more inspiring to tell students they can make anything, that an app can change the world, that the internet will bring peace and connection. And more than just inspiration, optimism about computing can bring hope: we lean hard on stories about how technology will save our lives, save our planet, and chart our future. As teachers, centering optimism can be key to exciting students, sustaining their engagement, and inspiring them to make and advocate for the computational world they want most.

But sometimes being critical is necessary. As we've discussed throughout this book, since its origins, computing has too often been a tool for denying resources to those in need, wresting power away from the public, and surveilling for the purpose of power and policing. As much as apps have brought some people joy, fame, and profit, Noble's quote above is right: the fundamental inequities and inequalities in the world, stemming from the matrix of oppression and unintended consequences of unregulated capitalism, cannot be fixed by inventing the next social media platform, and they cannot be fixed through a few bold people pleading to politicians.

The reality is that both of these narratives are true. Computing _is_ wondrous, amazing, and powerful, and it _is_ one of the most incredible technologies that humanity has ever invented, forever reshaping human civilization in ways we have yet to comprehend. The only reason it is these things is because people are endlessly optimistic about its awesome potential. And at the same time, computing has also been a vessel for some of humanity's worst impulses -- our greed, our impatience, our fear, our selfishness, our hate. Holding these two conflicting narratives about computing in our minds is essential to ensuring that whatever future of computing we make together is one that builds on humanity's best qualities -- our compassion, our grace, our cooperation, our respect, our morality. We cannot center these qualities while mindlessly pursuing innovation for its own sake, but we also cannot express them through computing without courageously and optimistically imagining its possibilities.

So if it's not an app and it's not an email, what will enable humanity to create more just futures of computing? In this book, we argue _teachers_. Teachers help future generations understand the world; teachers nurture youth's confidence to make the world what they want it to be; teachers shape our children's moral imaginations in how they guide us in making sense of the complexity of our society, other people, and ourselves. Teachers will be the ones that help students understand what computing is, what it is capable of, and how to maintain a delicate balance of critical and creative perspectives on computing as students begin to imagine the digital world they deserve. And teachers are the only ones that can give our most marginalized students -- those at the bottom of our racial hierarchies, those excluded for their disabilities, their sexualities, their gender identities, those ignored due to poverty and class, those feared because of their faith, nationality, or culture -- the courage to demand a digital world that treats them with dignity and respect.

This can be a heavy burden. After reading an entire book covering the foundations of CS, our nascent understanding of how to teach it, and our embryonic understanding of how to teach it in critical and culturally responsive ways, it's reasonable to feel overwhelmed. After all, the job of a teacher can already be overwhelming, even in disciplines that have long since stabilized. Engaging a new discipline like CS, which is constantly changing, and for which pedagogy is still experimental, untested, and uneven, requires courage.

But just as with computing, trepidation about CS education has to be balanced with hope and courage. Computing isn't going anywhere: it's in students' lives, in schools, and in nearly every institution of power in our modern world. If you can embrace computing's compelling and complex mysteries, they will find endless opportunity, learning, and inspiration. Every day, the news will bring new stories that captivate students' curiosity about new technology and its powers; every day, the new technologies in students' classrooms, pockets, and homes will raise questions about values, morality, and life; every day, CS teachers and CS education researchers will come together to share new ideas for learning, teaching, and assessment; and every day, a new teacher, a new school, and even a new country will join the effort. Being a CS educator in these early days may be bold and challenging, but it is also inspiring, and done with an ever growing community of other passionate teachers ready to help, share, support, and learn with you.

The key to participating in this growing effort is to pace yourself. There are so many things to do, and as individuals, we can only do so much. Consider the opportunities below, and perhaps pick one:

1. *Understand your position in the world*. Who are you? What power do you have? What power do you lack? What privileges do you have relative to others because of your identity, class, or status? Understanding your own ~positionality~positionality is an essential first step in understanding the positionality of students, and meaningfully responding to their needs, values, and culture.

2. *Understand your students*. Who are they? What captivates them? What is their relationship to computing now? What could their relationship to computing be? Culturally responsive and sustaining CS pedagogy depends deeply on answering these questions for the specific students in your class. Quite often, you don't need a curriculum to tell you what to teach. If you listen closely, your students are already telling you, they just don't have the words for it, or the courage to tell you.

3. *Understand your students' families and communities.* What are their values? What are their goals? How do they support each other? How do they see computing? Culturally responsive and sustaining CS pedagogy requires understanding the broader lives of your students, which are largely shaped by their caregivers and communities. What literacies about computing do they need and value? What work are they already doing to provide them?

4. *Develop your critical consciousness of CS.* This book has hopefully raised some awareness about what computing is and how it is used. Keep learning: scan the [references|references] for a book or paper that seems interesting and read it. Follow technology news or listen to technology podcasts, both largely focusing on computing. As you learn about how computing is evolving, ask yourself critical questions about where it is heading. How does it align or conflict with your own values?

5. *Develop your understanding of CS.* This book has hopefully given you a more granular understanding of which parts of CS you understand, and which parts you are still learning. Use that self-awareness to plan your own curriculum. Read further about CS concepts still out of your grasp, take classes to find teachers and community to support your learning, find a side project that excites you, but also deepens your knowledge.

6. *Develop your capacity to teach CS.* Review the unit sketches throughout this book for inspiration; try planning a lesson or unit based on them. Find CS professional development opportunities that not only focus on CS content knowledge, but on emerging CS pedagogy and practices, especially those that center critical and culturally responsive perspectives on CS. Using these opportunities to build community with other teachers with shared interests. One good option is the annual [CSTA conference|https://csteachers.org].

7. *Teach CS.* In many places in the world, CS education is still rare. Take the courageous leap to integrate some CS into other subject areas that you teach, or to teach a CS course. Adapt existing curricula to include the many ideas in the unit sketches in this book, or co-construct your own curricula with students, responding directly to their needs and interests. Resist the myth that students will know more than you by trading authority for vulnerability: CS education can and should be a partnership between teachers and students, with you as facilitator. You will learn from each other, and be better for it.

8. *Advocate to your school and district leaders*. The barriers to teaching even basic CS ideas can be endless. You might need devices; you might need IT to allow a particular website on school computers; you might need to fight to continue offering a CS elective. With whatever time you can spare, identify what is most essential to your capacity to teach, and your students' ability to learn, and fight for it.

9. *Advocate to your government.* Sometimes a school or district's resources are not enough. Most politicians understand very little about computing or schools and need the voices of communities of teachers to identify meaningful policy change or budget allocations. Find groups that are already organizing (e.g., the [Exploring Computing Education Pathways|https://ecepalliance.org] project is a good place for U.S. state advocacy), and figure out how you can help. Without your voice, nothing will change, or worse, the changes that do come might make teaching CS in critical and culturally responsive ways harder, or even [illegal|https://www.edweek.org/policy-politics/map-where-critical-race-theory-is-under-attack/2021/06].

10. *Lead*. Education reform requires leadership, and CS education in general, let alone critical and culturally responsive CS education will not happen without it. Consider becoming a principal, a superintendent, a policy advocate, or even a politician, and using your power and platform to ensure that CS literacies are a permanent part of your community's curriculum. If you have the capacity or desire for leadership, find a pathway to it. We need you.

It's going to take more than this book do the above. We'll be curating resources to help you on your journey at the website [CriticalCSEd.org|https://criticalcsed.org/resources/]. And if you find resources, or develop some of your own, be sure to send them to us to share more broadly. 

Few of us will do all of these things, and none of us need to. All that's really necessary is that we do just one of them. And if we do them together, we _can_ change the world through teaching and learning. It won't be through apps, or through emails to senators, but through a new generation of critical CS educators that inspire youth to imagine a critically conscious future for computing and society -- a future that still connects us, inspires us, and even amazes us, but first and foremost, a future in which computing respects and celebrates the inherent worth and dignity of everyone.