To many scholars, the human capacity to make is one of its intrinsic and defining qualities. From the earliest of human tools for transforming plants and rocks to tools, to our most advanced technologies, such as the robots we have sent to moons and planets and the edge of our galaxy, our ability to imagine entirely new categories of artifacts of practical value and then diligently work out how to make them reality, is one of the more remarkable things about our species.

Not surprisingly then, the [Next Generation Science Standards|https://www.nextgenscience.org] (NGSS) discussed in the previous chapter also focus greatly on engineering. These standards consider how to define engineering problems, how to take into account scientific limits in specifying solutions, how to consider design alternatives, how to use data to evaluate solutions, and how to iteratively test and modify solutions. All of these concepts and skills, at least within NGSS, conceive of engineering as a design discipline that creatively and analytically applies core ideas in science to iteratively refining practical solutions to clearly defined problems in human civilization. 

Computing is clearly part of this larger story: as we noted in the previous chapter, computing has become a central part of science, and so to the extent that engineering relies on science as its foundation, computing is part of the foundation of engineering. And yet, from one perspective, that connection might be a fickle one: what does building a bridge, designing an airplane, building electrical grids, manufacturing cars, or managing traffic have to do with computing? At some level, these are all problems of physics, chemistry, materials, and math and the many implications they have for what is and is not possible to build.

And yet, just as computing has woven its way through science, it has through engineering. All of the examples above, whether designing or building physical structures, assembling modes of transit, or creating the energy infrastructure that we rely on for powering our modern civilization, rely on software. And not just any software, but algorithms, data structures, simulations, and computational analyses that affect every part of engineering work, including conception, modeling, prototyping, testing, fabrication, and maintenance.

But engineering is also connected to computing in other ways.  Early in this book, we made a distinction between [Design and CS|design], describing Design as fundamentally about deciding what to make, and CS as about how to make it. This distinction framed CS as a kind of engineering discipline, concerned with the particulars of constructing software and computing hardware, spanning everything from the physics of transistors to the abstract mathematical theories of functions, data. But CS, of course, is only one kind of engineering, and CS itself relies on other kinds of engineering. And engineering, like CS, also involves certain kinds of design, blurring the distinction between decisions about what to make and how to make them. And so ultimately, one can conceive of CS as another unique form of engineering, just like aeronautic, bio, chemical, civil, electrical, industrial, materials, and mechanical engineering. And in the same way, those engineering disciplines must grapple with the distinction between deciding what to build and deciding how to build it.

In the rest of this chapter, we will survey the many disciplines of engineering, discuss the tensions between the how and why of engineering, and then discuss how to engage students at the intersection of engineering and computing.

|question.jpg|TODO|TODO|@ashley|

# Intersections

One of the primary ways that computing intersects with engineering is as a tool for modeling what might be engineered. Modeling is a fundamental part of engineering, as it helps engineers imagine what might be built, create representations of specific designs, and then analyze those designs for cost, safety, and other considerations. Prior to computing, modeling was largely done with paper, pencil, mathematics, and scientific theories as tools for making predictions. With computing, much of this has shifted to software, which is faster, more reliable, and more precise than error-prone human calculations, greatly increasing the capacity of engineers to conceive of, test, and realize engineering projects. Throughout this section, we’ll discuss (in alphabetical order), a subset of the many engineering disciplines that have been transformed by computing.

## Bioengineering

_Bioengineering_ is broadly concerned with applying science and engineering knowledge to the fields of biology, medicine, healthcare, agriculture, and sustainability. The field’s goals quite expansive, including keeping us healthy by empowering healthcare workers and patients to have the tools they need to prevent illness, manage chronic disease, diagnose illness, and offer therapies to sustain health and wellness; sustaining the climate by leveraging biological systems to clean our water and air; and to sustain and improve food production. Because of this breadth, the field builds upon numerous scientific foundations, including physics, chemistry.

Of course, as we’ve noted throughout this book, computing is far from natural. What might an engineering discipline concerned with biological life and how to sustain it have to do with computing?  The intersections between bioengineering and computing include both the use of computing as a tool for advancing bioengineering projects, but also as a medium for bioengineering solutions.

|Chapter24_Image_RoboticLimb.jpg|A bottom up shot of a man testing a robotic limb.|Robotic limbs are not only a marvel of engineering, but of computer science|Zackary Canepari.|<

Consider, for example, limb loss. There is nothing inherently wrong with being born out of an arm, or losing an arm to injury. However, if someone would like a functional arm, can bioengineering create one? For centuries, the best engineers could offer was solid prosthetics, which at a minimum offered the aesthetics of an arm, without any functionality. Some basic mechanical advances allowed people to perform basic and limited grasping maneuvers by using shoulder muscles. But advances in the combination of new sensors, robotics, and software to power all of them, have enabled prosthetic limbs that approach the full functionality of a natural forearm and hand, increasing users autonomy and quality of life. In some cases, computing-powered robotic arms even exceed the capabilities of natural limbs, allowing users to charge devices on their arms, connect them to the internet for notifications, and a range of yet unimagined possibilities of augmentation.

|Chapter24_Image_Vaccine.jpg|A health care provider with blue gloves extracting a COVID-19 vaccine into a syringe|mRNA vaccines are both a product of medical research, but also computing and the internet.||Associated Press|>

Computing and bioengineering also play an increasing role in transforming medicine and healthcare. For example, within days of the discovery of COVID-19 by Chinese scientists, they  had used computing-powered genome sequencers to digitally read the virus’s DNA, they had used the internet to share and the DNA with scientists globally, and thousands of scientists began to write computer programs to analyze the DNA to model the virus’s protein structure and begin identifying ways to potentially manufacture a vaccine. In just a few weeks, these computing-enabled analyses and models allowed scientists and bioengineers to propose several vaccine candidates and work with pharmaceutical engineers to devise rapid manufacturing, quality control, and distribution processes, all powered by computing, ultimately producing some of the fastest vaccines ever manufactured in human history, and some of the most effective. At the heart of this record time was the precision, speed, and modeling capabilities of computing, using data structures and algorithms to process, analyze, and verify digital representations of DNA and RNA.

Bioengineering is also broadly concerned with how to use life as a medium for solving human problems. One of the most pressing is identifying more sustainable sources of energy to power human civilization. For example, a growing community of bioengineers are exploring how to create new synthetic organisms designed to generate high quality biofuels as alternatives to oil. One approach is to create DNA for new species of microalgae that are specifically designed to generate biofuel from photosynthesis. These advances, like those for vaccines, rely on computing to digitize, analyze, and edit DNA through a computational tool called [CRISPR|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CRISPR], to model and simulate potential cellular structures and their biofuel output, and to analyze data from experiments of synthesized organisms.

## Civil Engineering

Whereas bioengineering is broadly concerned with using and supporting life through living systems, _Civil Engineering_ focuses on making modern life possible through the design, construction, and maintenance of the physical and natural environment in which we live. Like bioengineering, it is incredibly broad, spanning coasts, earthquakes, environment, geology, buildings, bridges, transportation, water, and the many forms of construction involved in building these systems.

For civil engineering, the chief benefit of computing is in ~simulation~simulation: after all, if you’re going to build a bridge, a building, or try out a new traffic scheme, it’s simply infeasible to start digging or tinkering with traffic light timing without risking irreparable damage to the environment, to existing structures, or to the general order of traffic flow. The general difficulty of trying to predict whether a building might fall down in an earthquake or how a new water distribution system might scale as a population grows raises a recurring challenge: how civil engineers model the current state of systems and simulate what might happen if they change them? Computing, and its ability to abstractly represent nearly anything to some level of fidelity, promises the ability to make these predictions at ever greater levels of accuracy.

|Chapter24_Image_Wind_Simulation.jpg|A graphical simulation of many gusts of wind blowing against a virtual building|Simulations help engineers ensure safety, comfort, and costs|[SimScale|https://www.simscale.com]|>

A canonical example of the benefits of simulations are with buildings and their surrounding environment. The problem is straightforward: given some architectural plan for a high rise, what is the likelihood that a heavy gust of wind near the top story or a catastrophic earthquake on the ground will cause the building to collapse? Such a collapse would be a tragic failure of engineering with decades of ramifications on families, cities, and the local economy, and people’s willingness to live in high rise buildings. Computer simulations allow civil engineers to enter architectural plans as 3D models and then precisely model the weather conditions around the building to simulate the impact of different weather events, such as wind. These models are ultimately data structures and algorithms that try to faithfully reflect the laws of physics and chemistry, as best as they can, to make predictions about how a building might respond. This in turn allows civil engineers to assess the risk of catastrophic failure, and if it is too high, work with an architect and construction engineers to iterate on the design until they find one that is unlikely to fall.

|Chapter24_Image_Traffic_Simulation.jpg|A three dimensional rendering of roads, cars, trucks, transit, lights, and signs|Traffic simulations can help civil engineers make predictions about the effects of traffic revisions|[Caliber|https://www.caliper.com/transmodeler/default.htm]|<

Traffic is another example. Whereas modeling a building’s response to physical forces is hard, modeling how human drivers (and potentially autonomous vehicles) will respond to new traffic patterns can be much harder. After all, even though we have laws that make behavior more predictable, people do not always follow them, or follow them reliably. By using data structures and algorithms to approximate human behavior in these conditions, simulations can help traffic engineers predict the effect of closing a lane, of installing a new stop light, of increasing the duration of a traffic signal, or of adding a bike lane. These simulations, in contrast to those that use physics to predict structural collapse, try to model multiple independent decision makers and how they are likely to react to new information and rules. These help urban planners estimate the likely cost and time impacts of changes, informing policy makers about if, when, and how to make change.

## Electrical Engineering

Although it is hard to imagine in our modern society, human civilization was not always electrified. When the sun set, we lived by firelight, fueled by wick and oil; when we wanted to connect with friends and family, we either found them in person or mailed a hand-written letter. The discovery of electricity in physics, and the subsequent application of electricity in electrical engineering, led to the near ubiquity of the electrical grids in modern life that power the countless devices in homes and offices and demand ever greater amounts of energy from fossil fuels, dams, wind turbines, and the sun. _Electrical Engineering_ is the discipline concerned with how to design, build, and maintain these grids, along with all of the other technologies that use electrical circuits for practical problems in human life.

Obviously, since computers are electrical devices, they are intrinsically connected to electrical engineering. They are the basis for all computer hardware, and one foundation for the discipline of computer engineering, which is responsible for the seemingly endless advances in computing speed and new forms of computer input and output. But since we have already discussed many of these connections in our earlier chapter on [Computers|computers], here we focus on a different intersection between electrical engineering and computing: the use of data and algorithms to power the other electrical things in our lives.

|Chapter24_Image_Electric_Grid.jpg|Dozens of displays showing dozens of dashboards of a Texas electric grid.|Keeping the electricity on requires elaborate computational infrastructure to monitor demand and problems. This is the 24/7 electric grid control room in Taylor, Texas.|[ERCOT|https://www.ercot.com]|<

Perhaps the most central, and one on which computers greatly depend, are our electric grids. Largely invisible to most of us, aside from the electrical ports found in our buildings, the grid is much like the internet: a massive interconnected network of energy generation, energy storage, and energy consumption. The grid comes with numerous challenges, including how to generate enough electricity to meet demand, how to store it for extended periods (hint: batteries), and how to ensure that spikes in demand do not do damage to the grid, cutting power to everyone using the grid. Computing is a central part of managing many of these problems: they are used to pull in data from sensors that monitor the grid, giving electrical engineers a near real-time view into the entire grid network and its health; algorithms can analyze this data to alert engineers to potential problems before the grid fails; and all of this information can be presented through user interfaces that help maintainers quickly get the information they need to make maintenance decisions and design improvements.

|Chapter24_Image_Cell_Tower.jpg|A cell tower in front of a blue sky next to a tree.|Cellular towers and their complex electrical and computational internals keep us connected|Unknown|<

There is another kind of network in electrical engineering that we do not typically think of as electrical: the wired and wireless networks of cables that connect the computers on the internet. And yet, the fundamental basis for what happens in these cables is fundamentally electric: wired electrical signals are sent along coaxial cables from cable modems, translated into light (a byproduct of electromagnetism) for transmission via fiber optic cables, or translated into radio signals for transmission wirelessly across protocols like Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, or satellite signals. The entire existence of the internet, and everything we do with it, is therefore fundamentally tied to the electrical engineering required to transmit and transform electrical signals through different media.

## Mechanical Engineering

As with many other engineering disciplines, mechanical engineering is quite broad. _Mechanical Engineering_ is concerned with making everything from machinery, to heating and cooling systems, to aircraft, watercraft, spacecraft, robotics, and medical devices, to even the nanotechnologies that help assemble microscopic structures for health or sustainability. Ultimately, the discipline is concerned with making things by applying the science of mechanics, dynamics, thermodynamics, fluid dynamics, materials science, and electricity. This highly interdisciplinary field and its highly eclectic application domains means that it reaches for some a range of critical human problems, including sustainability, wellness, and disease.

Because of this diversity, computing quite quickly became an essential part of mechanical engineering. It is used to model the physical structures of manufactured things; it is used as the intelligence behind robotic manufacturing; it helps monitor and maintain industrial equipment and machinery; it optimizes heating and cooling technologies; and it helps process engineers manage the entire lifecycle of design, manufacturing, and distribution. As with civil engineering, many of these applications of computing are fundamentally about simulation, helping mechanical engineers prototype, test, and refine ideas before they engage in the costly production of actual manufactured structures.

|Chapter24_Image_Nano.jpg|A grayscale image of a grid of nanotech molecules preventing a projectile from puncturing a surface.|This 30 micrometer carbon structure prevents puncturing.|MIT, Caltech|<

One example of this is _nanotechnology_, the use of physical matter at the atomic and molecular level to assemble structures at invisible scales. For example, nanotechnology has been applied to creating body armor of unprecedented strength, invisible water repellant film for eyeglasses, fabrics that can capture solar energy, and manufacturing processes that have made automobiles, aircraft, and spacecraft lighter than ever. But since all of these are invisible to the human eye and ear, all of this progress fundamentally requires tools and instruments that can make things visible. This is where computing comes in: they are what make modeling nano structures, simulating their interactions with other materials, and rapidly iterating on their designs even possible. Being a nanoengineer therefore means building data structures that represent atomic or molecular structures, writing code that manipulates and tests them, and creating and testing prototypes using computer-aided manufacturing processes.

|Chapter24_Image_Robotic_Assembly.jpg|Several robotic arms assemble parts of a car frame.|In most car manufacturing, it’s robots that do the work; people program them to do it quickly, reliably, and precisely.|ABB|<

Whereas nanotechnology deals with very small structures, some structures are so large and heavy that building them is hard and slow for human hands. Nowhere has this been more apparent than in automobile manufacturing. Since the advent of the car, car parts and assembly have largely been done by people, with large factories of people machining individual car parts using industrial fabrication equipment and assembly lines for constructing vehicles from these parts. An entire century of labor movements in the United States centered around these workforces and powered much of the driving-centered economies in the country. But as computing matured, and robotics emerged, car manufacturing has rapidly shifted from human labor to robotic labor: smaller teams of people now program large robotic arms that reliably and repeatedly follow programmed procedures to do the work that people use to do. There are still people involved, but their job is more as supervisor, programmer, and helper to the robotic assembly machines, and many fewer of them are needed; and of course, there are new jobs, with software engineers and roboticists designing, building, and selling manufacturing robots to car companies.

## Critically Conscious Engineering

At a deep level, engineering is a pragmatic endeavor, practically applying whatever science and technology is available to solving practical problems in human life. This pragmatism is one of its greatest assets: engineers do not let arbitrary disciplinary boundaries impede progress: if we can harvest sustainable energy by combining algae, photosynthesis, computation, and manufacturing, great; whatever barriers to interdisciplinarity exist, engineers regularly break them down in order to solve problems. This pragmatism, and relentless focus on solving problems, is what enables the field to make impressive progress on some of humanity’s greatest struggles with survival. And computing shares this ruthless pragmatism with engineering, liberally borrowing from science, technology, engineering, and mathematics to solve practical computational problems, like finding the fastest route to work, returning relevant search results in 50 milliseconds, and securing private data from thieves and schemers.

But pragmatism has its limits. Engineering, like computing, can often be so narrowly focused on one framing of a problem that it overlooks different ways of conceiving problems and different ways of living. For example, engineers are hard at work on trying to find more sustainable sources of energy to sustain our way of life; but this leaves little room for the many artists, activists, writers, and social scientists who wonder whether our way of life is sustainable in general, no matter the source of energy. Computing, to the extent that it is an engineering discipline, struggles with this same myopia. For example, is life really about trying to find the fastest way to school or work? Why isn’t it about trying to find the most joyful route or finding ways to work closer to home, or simply work less? This general tension between focusing on how to solve a problem, why to solve a problem, and for whom to solve a problem is a shared oversight of computing and engineering and one that each must engage fully.

|question.jpg|TODO|TODO|@ashley|

# Teaching Engineering with Computing

Integrations of computing into secondary engineering education have received far less attention than other disciplines. There may be many reasons for this. For example, science, mathematics, arts, and even humanities are perhaps simply more established parts of the canon in most publication education. And engineering, to the extent that it does get attention in secondary education, already has so much ground to cover. The rich range of engineering disciplines surveyed earlier makes this clear.

And yet, it is also clear how much engineering has been transformed by computing and how much engineering education has yet to reflect this. The result is that research has increasingly grasped for integrations that are authentic to engineering, while also being authentic to computing. These have broadly focused on the shared value in both disciplines of making.

This focus on making has led much of the research to create new platforms that combine computing and engineering ideas. For example, many in research (and industry) have developed physical, tangible coding toys that offer features of engineering activity (e.g., assembly, mechanics, sensors) brought to life through code that enables hardware and software to react<hamilton20>. Some of these hardware/software integrations come in the form of robots, where researchers have not only developed scaffolded platforms for constructing robots, but also curricula, competitions, and other pedagogy that aims to motivate youth who find embodied software captivating<balch08>. Some of these physical computing platforms focus instead on consumer electronics forms, such as enabling the creation of software-based devices that have physical electrical components, jointly developing knowledge of computing and electrical engineering<brown21>. Some intersect engineering, computing, and art, such as the [BlockyTalky|https://www.playfulcomputation.group/blockytalky.html] system, which uses networked physical computing devices for making collaborative music<kelly18>. And others use hardware/software integrations to explore more serious computing topics, such as security<lédeczi19>.

The creation of these platforms have not only enabled some engineering education to include computing, but also revealed important tensions between the two disciplines. For example, research on developmental requirements for programming robotics have found that younger children often struggle to simply coordinate spatial skills sufficiently to precisely orchestrate robotic movement.<clarke21> Other studies have found that the embodied form of robots are so captivating that students can become overwhelmed by trying to simply get hardware working, increasing the time between writing code and seeing it run, and therefore decreasing time to reflect on computation.<fagin02> This can ultimately result in students learning more about engineering concepts (such as sensors) and less about how programs use sensor data to make decisions<chakarov20>. This tension between engineering and computing concerns has led some research to try to more greatly scaffold the engineering dimensions of physical computing, for example, limiting what can made to minimize troubleshooting<luong21> or augmenting the engineering ports of physical computing projects with more sophisticated debugging support of hardware problems.<hill20>

When this scaffolding is tuned appropriately for student skills, integrations between engineering and computing can be affirming, inclusive, culturally responsive, and collaborative in ways that engineering and computing alone are not. For example, some work has found that laying with electronics through computation at home (e.g., during remote learning, or after school) can afford a sense of agency and play than.<chakarov21> Physical computing that is collaborative can support new configurations of peer pedagogy and resourcefulness.<deitrick15> Bringing maker culture into classrooms can enable peer pedagogy, affirm students' assets, bridge home and school, and broaden participation, when well-facilitated by teachers.<fields17,fields18> And when what is being made has cultural authenticity, combining engineering and computing can affirm students’ identities and communities.<babbitt21> Teachers also see these benefits and quickly learn to amplify them, honoring student skills not previously recognized, facilitating interactions with students in and outside of class, strengthening connections between school and home, and uplifting students who had not felt successful in computing prior.<nakajima20>

While these integrations can be quite successful at being culturally responsive, achieving this can require significant teacher professional development. Some studies have found that developing sufficient content knowledge, for example, requires ongoing professional development that can build skills and pedagogical content knowledge over months and years.<chakarov19> Others have found that teachers specifically benefit from hands-on professional development that involves teachers making and problem-posing in the same way their students might, while also critically assessing and self-examining their work to better imagine student experience.<nakajima19>

While some making is culturally situated, very little of it explicitly engages critical making, instead reinforcing the value and culture of making. For example, critical making might entail hard conversations about _whether_ to make something, or _why_ to make something, how to unmake something that is doing harm, or how to fix or maintain engineering infrastructure that is broken or not meeting needs. These perspectives are often doubly in tension with engineering and computer science cultures, which often elevate making well above critical concerns about what is made.

% UNIT SKETCH

# Conclusion: digital making and maintaining

While engineering can be taught through a computational lens, it doesn’t necessarily need to be. As we’ve seen throughout this chapter, computing is often just one of many tools for envisioning, building, and maintaining the many systems that make up modern civilization. Focusing on the many authentic tools of engineering practice, whether mathematics, physics, or physical implements of measurement and fabrication, is obviously essential, as they are the foundation of modern engineering.

But it should also be clear that ignoring computing in engineering education would misrepresent the state of practice: engineers, in both research and industry, rely immensely on computing to ensure our safety and expand the promise of engineering to new areas of human experience. Finding a way to ensure that computing is visible in engineering education is part of revealing how engineering changes in response to new technologies, and how those changes can reshape our way of life. Teachers are at the heart of finding authentic ways of placing computing alongside the many other tools and practices in engineering, and of helping students find joy in making.

@standardsHeader
@standardsBlurb

@cstaHeader
@csta2CS01
@csta2CS02
@csta2CS03
@csta2IC20
@csta2IC21
@csta3AIC24
@csta3AIC25

@toleranceHeader
@tolerance9
@tolerance14

@teacherHeader
@teacher1f
@teacher4b
@teacher4c
@teacher4d
@teacher4e
@teacher4f
@teacher4g