"
...whenever we hear the promises of tech being extolled, our antennae should pop up to question what all the hype of "better, faster, fairer" might be hiding and making us ignore. And when bias and inequity come to light, "lack of intention" to harm is not a viable alibi. One cannot reap the reward when things go right but downplay the responsibility when they go wrong.
" Ruha Benjamin, _Race After Technology_<benjamin19>

To many, ~computers~computer and the ~computer science~cs that shapes them are things of wonder. They’ve transformed how we stay connected with friends, families, and colleagues from around the world. They’ve enabled entirely new social and media experiences in video games, the internet, television, and movies. They have led to dramatic increases in convenience for many, making it possible to order nearly anything online, or to easily catch a ride home or to the airport. Computers are also transforming science and scholarship, accelerating discoveries in health, wellness, and energy. Our new computational world is, for so many, one of magic, possibility, and freedom.

CS teaching, therefore, naturally gravitates toward these utopian narratives. They can inspire students to study computing, they can empower students to see themselves as agents of change in the world, and they can position students as not just contributing to social change, but leading it, by harnessing one of the most powerful and flexible mediums that people have ever invented. And how can students not be enticed? The world’s richest people and companies are computing companies, and often founded by people who started with a computer science education. The media reinforces this message, sending a steady signal to families and children that computing is not only dominating industry, but society in general, accruing an intoxicating power to shape the course of the world. And many students get the message: if they want power, influence, and economic stability, they should study computer science. And as teachers, we often respond, framing CS classes as places that promise a path to that power, influence, and stability.

And yet, dominant conceptions of computing, bestowed upon primary and secondary schools by ~computer scientists~computerscientist in higher education, often describe computing as something purely abstract. Software is about algorithms, computability, functions, and proofs. Data is just a stream of abstract bits with well-defined formal meaning. Technology is a neutral tool that can and should be studied with the same abstraction as mathematics. These views of CS education argue that computer science simultaneously shapes society, and is yet somehow divorced from it, transcending people and society as pure truth. This narrative has long lived in higher education CS, and is beginning to find its way into middle school and high school classes, which have often imported the values and politics from CS, as well as these abstract framings, into learning standards, curricula, and professional development.

This uncritical view of CS is far from just an incomplete story--for many, it is becoming an invisible crisis of injustice and oppression. Digitization efforts are removing human judgment from social services and financial infrastructure, replacing them with algorithms that encode racial and gender bias into their decisions. Software developers are creating software that is inaccessible to people with disabilities, creating an increasingly digital world that people who are blind, deaf, or neurodiverse cannot see, hear, or engage. Entire industries are being designed around secretly gathering private data so that it may be monetized, enriching private organizations, while putting vulnerable groups at risk of doxxing, harassment, identity theft, poverty, and more. CS, while wondrous, is therefore also perilous, especially for people marginalized by society.

These counter narratives have never been more visible. Several outstanding books<eubanks18, benjamin19, costanzachock20> deconstruct the role that code and data are playing in encoding bias; several documentaries such as [Coded Bias|https://www.netflix.com/title/81328723] and [The Social Dilemma|https://www.thesocialdilemma.com] are amplifying the work of the marginalized scholars leading this research, while also calling in the powerful designers, developers, and technology leaders who have created some of these systems. The media, for the first time, is making space for narratives about CS that aren’t purely utopian, or purely dystopian, but complex, just as society is complex.

Unfortunately, books and movies can only go so far. As any teacher knows, there’s a difference between knowing a topic, and knowing how to teach a topic{Too often, these are confused. A helpful context for distinguishing them is the difference between content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge: knowing a concept versus knowing how to teach it.}. Most of the books and materials created to help teachers develop content and pedagogical content knowledge about CS start from uncritical framings of CS. The eclectic _Computer Science in K-12: An A-Z Handbook on Teaching Programming_<grover20> does an outstanding job covering programming pedagogy from multiple perspectives, but offers few critical perspectives on code or computation from the perspective of gender, race, or disability justice. The powerful _Connected Code: Why Children Need to Learn Programming_<kafai16> makes a convincing case about how code can empower youth with self-expression and community, but depicts an uncomplicated view of code as purely creative, when it is also political. The highly practical _Guide to Teaching Computer Science: An Activity-based Approach_<hazzan15>, offers an impressive scope of activities, case studies, and curricular reviews, but does little to question what kinds of CS literacy youth need to understand how computing is reshaping the world in unequal ways. These books, and the dozens of others that offer teaching methods for secondary education, can help prepare teachers to teach programming, but offer little to help prepare teachers to teach programming critically. And books like _Preparing and Sustaining Social Justice Educators_<francois21>, which center critical questions about equity and justice, have little ot say about computing.

This book seeks to address this gap, achieving three related goals. First, we want it to offer a critical take on CS content knowledge, explaining its foundations in social terms. We believe teachers _with_ CS backgrounds need to understand how seemingly abstract CS ideas are actually inherently social ideas. But we also believe that teachers _without_ CS content knowledge will be much better positioned to understand, teach, and integrate CS content knowledge into other subjects if they learn CS as an inherently social subject. Therefore, throughout this book, we offer explanations of ideas in CS like "computers", "programming languages", "code" and other often intimidating technical topics not in purely technical terms, but also in historical, economic, and social terms.

Second, we want the book to offer new ideas about what it means to teach CS content knowledge. Many of the methods for secondary CS teaching center on writing computer programs, whether to demonstrate mastery or enable self-expression. While writing code is certainly a central part of CS skill, it is not the only part. CS skills also entail _reading_ code, _understanding_ computational systems, and _critiquing_ how ~software~software functions both technically and socially. The methods we present throughout this book will center critical analysis of computing, helping teachers to develop students’ critical consciousness.

Lastly, we want the book to build confidence amongst teachers, especially those who are just beginning to grow their CS content knowledge. CS does not have to be hard; in fact, its perceived "hardness" is more a byproduct of CS culture, emerging from early communities of hobbyists and mathematicians who built their identities around having knowledge and expertise about computers that others did not have. This elitism pervades many communities in CS not because it is intrinsic to CS, but because it advantages those in CS to guard CS knowledge from broader understanding. The book seeks to dispel this myth of impenetrability, building a new kind of CS knowledge and expertise amongst CS teachers that even traditionally dominant groups in CS do not have: the ability to see computing as a social phenomenon, and one that all youth must be literate in, in order to parse our increasingly computational world. _All_ teachers can learn this new literacy, and teach it to youth, and we hope this book is the part of this learning.

While we believe a justice-focused CS literacy is something that everyone needs, children and adults alike, this book specifically focuses on secondary education. This focus on middle and high school, and on adolescents is intentional: 12-18 year olds are at a developmental stage where they are just beginning to comprehend their social worlds and their roles and positions in these social worlds. We believe that learning CS in social terms at these ages can not only help them integrate perspectives on computing into their new awareness of the world, but that the ideas in CS itself can help them better understand what it means to be human, to make decisions, and to have intelligence. Children in primary school may be too young for conversations about systemic social conflict. And while adults in postsecondary and beyond need to learn justice-focused CS literacy as well, many are less open to such learning, having hardened their political views as they enter adulthood. We likely need different methods for children and adults.

Our focus is therefore adolescents, and on a counter narrative about computing that views CS as both magical, but also fraught. It simultaneously examines the racist, sexist, ableist, classist reality of our global society, and demonstrates how CS is often used to amplify and reinforce these forms of oppression in daily life. It shows how only certain people experience the utopian narrative of CS, and those that do go on to perpetuate this narrative in higher education and industry, systematically and often unintentionally excluding those who were never included. It positions students as agents of social change, both in how they use computing, but also in whether they use it, and to what end. This is a book for secondary CS educators who want to develop the agency and skills to catalyze social change though their students.

Finally, while the book strives to offer global perspectives on CS education, several things bias it towards Western views. One source of bias is the Western dominance in the origins of CS, with the United Kingdom and United States centered in much of the history of its foundations and sources of power. But a second source of bias is our own: we have written a book that is in English; we are all researchers and teachers in the United States; we have scoped the book to learning and teaching standards developed in the United States by organizations and communities focused on the United States. Thus, many of our efforts to share global perspectives will be inevitably limited by our own perspectives, experiences, and positions. We hope the global community will help us notice these oversights and evolve the book to incorporate more global perspectives.

# How this book is maintained and organized

This book is unconventional in a few ways. First, it lives exclusively online as a website. This has many benefits. For example, it’s free and will always be free: there are no traditional publishers involved, no royalties, and no hidden motives. Rather, it is a community resource. Another benefit is that it can be a living document; as new research emerges on critical CS pedagogy and as we all gain experience teaching CS critically, this book can and will change. However, unlike print book editions, which come out infrequently, and require a new purchase, this book will change frequently, evolving in response to feedback and the availability of new resources. We hope you’ll come back to it. Finally, hosting the book on the web makes it far more accessible than print or e-books, both of which impose problematic barriers to people with disabilities who rely on screen readers. This ensures that everyone can read the book, regardless of their abilities or their access to particular devices.

In addition to using an unconventional format, the book was also written in unconventional ways. Amy led the bulk of the writing and writing process, but engaged a diverse community for feedback, including experienced teacher educators, higher education CS and education faculty, doctoral students studying critical CS pedagogy, practicing secondary CS teachers, and an advisory board that included researcher-practitioner partnership experts, leaders of CS teacher communities, district leaders from around Washington state. And, of course, since the book is a living document, feedback from anyone in the world can shape the book in new ways, responding to global efforts to teach CS more critically.

The current version of the book also has an unconventional organization, especially relative to existing books on CS education. Part I of the book begins with three chapters that set the foundation for the critical CS teaching methods we present in the second part of the book. We begin with @history, which discusses the origins of CS and CS education as disciplines, to help CS teachers see, question, and dismantle the assumptions behind the discipline, and replace them with anti-racist, anti-sexist, and anti-ableist foundations. The next chapter, [Critical CS Pedagogy|pedagogy], examines the many different kinds of CS literacy that have been proposed and taught, making the case for more critically conscious CS pedagogy. The third foundation chapter, [Critical CS Assessment|assessment], examines how we know what students know about CS, and how those ways of knowing can be either empowering or oppressive, depending on how we conceive of and deploy them. We return to the ideas in these foundations throughout the book.

Part II of the book teaches foundations of CS in social terms. Each chapter focuses on a particular CS concept and then offers methods for teaching the concept in critically conscious ways. The particular order of chapters is unconventional: many books on CS or CS education will center on programming, as it is often the focal skill of CS teaching. However, this book centers different aspects of CS content knowledge. We begin with a discussion of the intersection between CS, equity, and justice, offering a view of how CS is situated in society, and how to help students see how it is situated. We then turn to design, as distinguished from CS, and examine the way that deciding _what_ software should do gets entangled with _how_ it does it. We then consider two central ideas in CS--what is intelligence and what is information--and complicate the more abstract answers that CS has conventionally offered. We then move "up the stack" as computer scientists often say, talking about computer hardware; computer operating systems that bridge hardware and software; the programming languages we use to tell software what to do; the central ideas of control and data flow in computer programs; and the big ideas of algorithms and functions. Each of these chapters reframe these big ideas in historical, political, and social terms, while offering sketches of example unit plans that help students situate these concepts into the broader world.

Only after these conceptual foundations does the book engage programming as a skill. We examine the many distinct reading, writing, and analytics skills that it requires, offering methods for scaffolding each. We then discuss artificial intelligence and machine learning, which are emerging as an alternative (or at least a complement) to programming, in which computer programs are derived from data rather than being programmed. The next three chapters then examine programming skills, including verification, debugging, using tools, and managing projects, all of which are central to creating software, but often overlooked in mainstream CS pedagogy. Throughout, these chapters examine these skills critically, centering conversations on responsibility.

Part III of the book examines integrations between CS and other disciplines, specifically the humanities, arts, and mathematics and sciences. Each of those disciplines have their own perspectives one equity and justice, and their own opportunities to connect to topics in CS. These chapters describe these opportunities and offer methods and critical analysis of these methods.

Throughout all of these methods chapters, we build upon the views in Paulo Freire’s _Pedagogy of the Oppressed_<freire68>, who viewed the purpose of education not as imparting knowledge, but as awakening students’ ~critical consciousness~criticalcon to the systems, structures, and ideas that constrain and oppress them. We are similarly inspired by ideas of culturally-sustaining pedagogy<paris12> and culturally-responsive computing<scott15>, which position learning as situated in students’ funds of knowledge and lived experience. We attempt to balance these critical and student-centered perspectives on computing with authentic skills and content. In this way, the methods are designed to help students recognize their own personal relationships to computing and their power to change those relationships, both through social action, but also through computing.

While the book was written with pre-service teacher candidates in mind, and is designed to be read end-to-end, each chapter is also designed to largely stand alone. Different audiences might therefore find value in reading the book in other ways:

* Experienced secondary CS teachers might read Part I foundations and the method sections of other chapters, getting ideas for how to integrate critical perspectives into their current practices and curricula.

* Experienced secondary humanities and social studies teachers might read the @history chapter, and the content sections of each methods chapter, and Part III of the book, learning CS and its ideas in ways that might connect to existing topics.

* Higher education CS faculty might read Part I foundations and select chapters that connect with their areas of instruction, identifying ways to integrate critical CS pedagogy into their teaching. 

* School leaders might read the [CS Education History|history] chapter and Part III integrations chapters, to learn how secondary CS educators might integrate CS into other subject areas.

# On language and terminology

While we will discuss most CS terminology in the chapters, there are some terms we define here because we won’t define them elsewhere. (You'll also find glossary definitions throughout the book, including in this chapter.)

Two terms, which we have already used, are *computing* and *computer science*. When we say computing, we mean the broader phenomenon of using computer hardware and software in society. This includes digitization and automation efforts, software development and programming, information assurance and cybersecurity, and intersections between software and society. When we say CS, or computer science, we’re more narrowly referring to the concepts, skills, and practices in academic computer science. We make this distinction between CS, especially in higher education, often excludes these broader issues.

Another phrase, increasingly common in K-12 CS education, is *computational thinking*. This phrase is often used to refer to the methods, perspectives, and cognitive skills involved in producing computational artifacts. Whether such thinking is meaningfully different from other kinds of thinking is an ongoing debate amongst computing education researchers<grover13>. Some argue that it is and strive to measure it in assessments; many teachers find it to be a useful phrase for engaging teachers in CS education, because it doesn’t carry the same intimidating connotations as CS<moudgalya21>. Our perspective is that the phrase is too vague and ill-defined to be meaningful. Therefore, throughout the book, we will use more precise language to talk about many distinct computing skills. Such language might all fall under the umbrella of computational thinking for some, and we aren’t opposed to teachers using it, but we avoid it to avoid confusion.

Throughout the book, we will also use the words *programming* and *coding* interchangeably. Academia and industry have long used programming to refer to the broad set of skills involved in designing, implementing, and verifying computer programs. The word coding was used as well, but was less prevalent, as it had a connotation of informality, which was in tension with most of the professional contexts in which programming was discussed. When K-12 CS education reform efforts emerged in the mid 2000’s, Code.org popularized coding through its [Hour of Code|https://hourofcode.com/us] events, which led many K-12 teachers to adopt the word "coding" instead of "programming." They have no meaningful differences in meaning, so we will treat them as synonyms.

Finally, throughout this text, we talk about race, gender, and disability and other identity language. Language about identity is always evolving, as it rightfully should as people with identities change it to reflect new insights and culture around identity. At this moment in time, we will follow these editorial practices:

* When discussing racial and ethnic categories, we will use capital letters for all racial groups (e.g, White, Black, Hispanic, Native American). We do this while simultaneously recognizing the inherently social construction of race, and the role that racial social constructs play in organizing society, algorithms, and data.

* When discussing gender and disability, we generally use person-first language (e.g., trans people, not "transgenders"; Autistic people, not "autistics") and non-biological language (e.g., women and girls, not "females"). We will also generally avoid gendered language except when including gender conveys helpful social context.

Such choices are not only important in general, but explicitly important in computing, where such choices are often embedded into algorithms and data structures that encode these social constructs into technical artifacts that shape predictions, decisions, and resources.

# On code

This book will contain code. It will look like this:

`python!
# This is a simple Python program.
print("Hi, I print the symbols between these quotes.")
`Press the play button to execute the program.

Some code will be just for reading; other code will include a play button like the one above, allowing the program to be executed.

We'll primarily use [Python|https://www.python.org] in this book. This isn't because Python is necessarily the best programming language, for teaching, learning, or other purposes. Rather:

* It is a relatively simple language syntactically, so it won't get in the way of illustrating basic concepts.

* We can run Python in a web browser, enabling examples in this book to be editable and executable.

* Python is widely used in data science applications, which aligns well with some of the science and statistics integrations that teachers might explore in math and science.

* Despite being used for many advanced things, the Python community positions the language as suitable for learners and tries to be welcoming to newcomers.

There are many other languages we could have chosen, but few quite meet the goals above.

# On standards

In all of these chapters, we make explicit links between the [CSTA Teacher Standards|https://csteachers.org/page/standards-for-cs-teachers], the [CSTA K-12 CS Learning Standards|https://k12cs.org], and the [Teaching Social Justice Standards|https://www.tolerance.org/frameworks/social-justice-standards]. We include them to help you connect the concepts and methods in the book with any standards you might be expected to teach, as well as teaching skills you might be expected to have.

However, our linking these standards is not an unqualified endorsement. The authors of this book view each of these standards as a meaningful collection of big ideas in computer science, and critical skills for CS educators. But some of the standards are silent either on issues of equity and justice (in the case of the _K-12 CS standards_) or silent on the role of computing in diversity, equity, and inclusion (in the case of the _Teaching Social Justice Standards_). Therefore, rather than reiterating standards directly, we explicitly reframe and revise each standard from a justice and computing lens, ensuring that even the most abstract and technical topics (e.g., binary data encodings) have a clear link to justice. We do this to argue, across the book, that no subject in CS divorced from people, society, or human values.

The [Kapor Center|https://www.kaporcenter.org]'s [Culturally Responsive-Sustaining Computer Science Education Framework|https://www.kaporcenter.org/equitableCS/] is perhaps the closest set of learning guidelines to our vision for this book. Here is how the Kapor center describes its goals:

"
Culturally responsive-sustaining computer science pedagogy ensures that students’ interests, identities, and cultures are embraced and validated, students develop knowledge of computing content and its utility in the world, strong CS identities are developed, and students engage in larger socio-political critiques about technology’s purpose, potential, and impact.
" Kapor Center, [Culturally Responsive-Sustaining Computer Science Education|https://www.kaporcenter.org/equitableCS/]

You will find these ideas throughout the book. To align with it explicitly, we note in each chapter the relevant components from the framework.

Finally, to help you navigate the standards, we include [an appendix|standards] that lists all of the standards the chapters in which they appear. Each chapter also lists the specific standards that they address.

-

We hope you enjoy the book! While we view this book as an essential text for shaping CS teachers’ conceptions of CS and justice, it is by no means the only way to frame critical CS pedagogy, and it is in no way sufficient for becoming a justice-focused CS teacher. The ideas and methods in this book have to be put into action. They must be refined through reflection, they must be culturally situated in students’ values, norms, and beliefs; and they must be critically adapted to evolving ideas and research about CS and justice. We hope this book is one tool of many in helping you do that.